.. _surface_codes:

Surface codes
=============

This page introduces the surface code, the quantum error-correcting code at the
heart of ``tqec``. The goal is to build intuition for how the surface code works
and why it is a leading candidate for fault-tolerant quantum computation, before
connecting these ideas to ``tqec``'s abstractions.

For a comprehensive treatment, see Fowler et al. :footcite:`Fowler_2012`.


Why error correction?
---------------------

Physical qubits are noisy. Every gate, measurement, and idle period introduces
errors. A single physical qubit cannot store quantum information reliably for
the duration of a useful computation. **Quantum error correction (QEC)** solves
this by encoding a single *logical* qubit across many physical qubits, so that
errors can be detected and corrected without destroying the encoded information.

The surface code is one of the most promising QEC schemes because:

- It requires only **nearest-neighbor interactions** on a 2D grid of qubits,
  matching the layout of current superconducting hardware.
- It has a comparatively **high error threshold** (~1%), meaning it can tolerate
  realistic physical error rates.
- Its decoding problem is well-studied and efficient decoders exist.


Stabilizers and the code space
------------------------------

The surface code is a *stabilizer code*. A stabilizer code defines its
code space — the subspace where logical information lives — through a set of
commuting Pauli operators called **stabilizers**. Any state in the code space
is a simultaneous +1 eigenstate of every stabilizer.

On the surface code's 2D qubit grid, stabilizers come in two flavors:

- :math:`X`\ **-type stabilizers** (sometimes called *vertex operators*):
  products of Pauli-\ :math:`X` on the data qubits surrounding a plaquette.
- :math:`Z`\ **-type stabilizers** (sometimes called *face operators*):
  products of Pauli-\ :math:`Z` on the data qubits surrounding a plaquette.

Each stabilizer is measured by an ancilla (measure) qubit placed at the center
of its plaquette. The measurement is performed by a short sequence of CNOT (or
CX/CZ) gates between the ancilla and the surrounding data qubits, as described
in the :ref:`Plaquette <terminology>` section of the Terminology page.


Detecting errors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When a physical error occurs on a data qubit, some stabilizer measurements will
flip from +1 to -1. These flipped outcomes are called **syndrome bits**. Because
each data qubit participates in multiple stabilizers, a single error creates a
characteristic pattern of syndrome bits.

Crucially, measuring stabilizers does **not** reveal the encoded logical
information — it only reveals whether an error has occurred. This is the key
property that allows error correction without collapsing the logical state.

A **decoder** analyzes the syndrome and infers a correction. The correction does
not need to exactly reverse the physical error; it only needs to return the state
to the code space without introducing a *logical* error.


The 2D layout
-------------

The surface code arranges data qubits and measure qubits on a 2D grid. A
standard surface code patch (also called a *planar code*) looks like the
following:

.. code-block:: text

      Z───d───Z───d───Z
      |       |       |
      d   X   d   X   d
      |       |       |
      Z───d───Z───d───Z
      |       |       |
      d   X   d   X   d
      |       |       |
      Z───d───Z───d───Z

Here ``d`` denotes data qubits, ``X`` denotes :math:`X`-type measure qubits,
and ``Z`` denotes :math:`Z`-type measure qubits. Each measure qubit sits at
the center of its plaquette and measures the stabilizer formed by the surrounding
data qubits.

In ``tqec``, this layout is generated by :ref:`templates <template>`, which
produce a 2D array of indices representing different plaquette types. Templates
are the mechanism that makes the surface code layout scalable across different
code distances.


Boundaries
~~~~~~~~~~

A surface code patch has four edges. Two opposite edges are :math:`X`\ **-type
boundaries** (sometimes called *rough* boundaries), and the other two are
:math:`Z`\ **-type boundaries** (sometimes called *smooth* boundaries).
Stabilizers along the boundary involve fewer data qubits (two instead of four)
because they sit at the edge of the patch.

The boundary types determine which logical operators can terminate on them:

- A logical :math:`Z` operator is a chain of Pauli-\ :math:`Z` operators
  connecting the two :math:`Z`-type boundaries.
- A logical :math:`X` operator is a chain of Pauli-\ :math:`X` operators
  connecting the two :math:`X`-type boundaries.

In ``tqec``, the boundary types of a surface code patch are encoded in the
:ref:`ZXCube <zxcube>` naming convention. For example, a ``ZXZ`` cube has
:math:`Z`-type boundaries facing the X-axis, :math:`X`-type boundaries facing
the Y-axis, and :math:`Z`-type boundaries facing the Z (time) axis.


Code distance
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The **code distance** :math:`d` is the minimum number of physical errors
required to cause an undetectable logical error. Equivalently, it is the
minimum weight of any logical operator.

For a distance-\ :math:`d` surface code, the patch uses :math:`d^2` data
qubits and :math:`d^2 - 1` measure qubits, for a total of :math:`2d^2 - 1`
physical qubits per logical qubit.

In ``tqec``, the code distance is controlled through a scaling parameter
:math:`k`, where :math:`d = 2k + 1`. Templates and plaquettes are defined in
terms of :math:`k`, so the same logical computation can be compiled at any
desired code distance.


QEC rounds and the space-time picture
--------------------------------------

Error correction is not a one-shot process. Stabilizer measurements are
**repeated** in each QEC round. This repetition serves two purposes:

1. **Measurement errors** — a single stabilizer measurement may itself be
   faulty. By comparing consecutive rounds, measurement errors can be
   distinguished from data qubit errors.
2. **Continuous protection** — errors accumulate over time, so ongoing
   stabilizer measurement is needed throughout the computation.

This leads naturally to a **space-time** picture. The 2D qubit grid extends
along a third axis representing time (QEC rounds). In this 3D view:

- A surface code **memory experiment** is a rectangular prism: the spatial
  patch extended through :math:`d` rounds of stabilizer measurement.
- Errors create syndromes that form 1D strings in this 3D space.
- Detection events (syndrome flips between consecutive rounds) live on the
  *edges* between time slices.

This space-time perspective is central to ``tqec``, where computations are
represented as 3D structures composed of :ref:`cubes <cube>` and
:ref:`pipes <pipe>`. Each cube occupies approximately :math:`d^3` space-time
volume, corresponding to a surface code patch executing for :math:`d` QEC
rounds.


Logical operations
------------------

A key advantage of the surface code is that many logical operations can be
performed by manipulating the code patches in space and time, without needing
transversal gates or magic state distillation. These geometric operations are
the basis of **lattice surgery**, which is covered on the
:ref:`Lattice surgery <lattice_surgery>` page.

Common logical operations in the surface code include:

- **Initialization and measurement** — creating a logical qubit in a known
  state or reading it out. The basis (\ :math:`X` or :math:`Z`) of the
  initialization / measurement is determined by the temporal boundary of the
  corresponding cube in ``tqec`` (see :ref:`ZXCube <zxcube>`).
- **Logical identity (memory)** — maintaining a logical qubit through
  repeated QEC rounds with no change. In ``tqec``, this corresponds to a
  single cube.
- **Movement** — shifting a logical qubit to a different spatial location by
  extending and contracting the code patch. In ``tqec``, this is represented
  by a spatial :ref:`pipe <pipe>` connecting two cubes.
- **Multi-qubit operations** — implemented via lattice surgery (merging and
  splitting code patches).


Connecting to ``tqec``
----------------------

The surface code concepts above map directly to ``tqec``'s abstractions:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 35 65

   * - Surface code concept
     - ``tqec`` abstraction
   * - Surface code patch (at one time step)
     - :ref:`Template <template>` + :ref:`Plaquettes <terminology>`
   * - Stabilizer measurement circuit
     - :class:`~tqec.plaquette.plaquette.Plaquette`
   * - Patch extended through time
     - :ref:`Cube <cube>` (:math:`\approx d^3` space-time volume)
   * - Boundary type (X or Z)
     - Face labels in :ref:`ZXCube <zxcube>` naming
   * - Logical operator tracking
     - :ref:`Correlation Surface <terminology>`
   * - Spatial merging / extension
     - :ref:`Pipe <pipe>` connecting cubes
   * - Code distance :math:`d`
     - Scaling parameter :math:`k` with :math:`d = 2k + 1`
   * - Full computation
     - :class:`~tqec.computation.block_graph.BlockGraph`

For a hands-on introduction to building computations using these abstractions,
see the :doc:`quick_start` or the :doc:`build_computation` tutorial.


References
----------
.. footbibliography::
